---
title: "Arch Linux - Lenovo ThinkPad T14 Gen 4 (Intel)"
date: 2024-10-31T20:04:06-07:00
draft: false
---

## Introduction

I have installed Arch Linux on a Lenovo ThinkPad T14 Gen 4 (Intel) "work" machine. This page outlines some setup items and other issues.

## Background

I wanted to get a better laptop for Linux after using it on a poorly supported [Surface Book 3](./2024-04-04-1712257725.md), which was a former work laptop that I obtained for free.

The Lenovo ThinkPad T14 Gen 4 (Intel) didn't have a dedicated Arch Linux page when I bought it (I have since [created one](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Lenovo_ThinkPad_T14/T14s_(Intel)_Gen_4)), but it does have [Ubuntu certification](https://ubuntu.com/certified/202303-31392), and other online reports gave me confidence that there wouldn't be any issues.

This model of laptop was released in May 2023, with the latest release being the Gen 5. A slightly older generation laptop generally means better compatibility with the latest kernels.

This model has soldered RAM, so I made sure to buy it with 32 GB of RAM, which I anticipate will be sufficient for the near future. There aren't many upgrade/repair options other than changing out the SSD and battery, which was fine for my needs.

In terms of price, I was looking for a cheaper refurbished or open box machine and didn't want to spend over $1000.

Other models I considered:

* Framework 13
  * The amount of hardware configuration options seemed overkill for my needs
  * Difficult to find refurbished
  * Not as established a supplier compared to Lenovo

* Lenovo ThinkPad X1 Carbon Gen 11 (December 2022)
  * More expensive due to focus on lightness
  * No replaceable RAM or batteries
  * The lack of a replaceable battery was a dealbreaker

* Lenovo ThinkPad T14S Gen 4 (May 2023)
  * Would have been my preferred model as it's slightly lighter than the T14
  * Doesn't have an ethernet port (which I don't require)
  * Less popular than the T14, so couldn't find any with 32 GB of RAM

* Lenovo ThinkPad T14 Gen 5 (May 2024)
  * Strongly considered this option
  * RAM is replaceable with two DDR5 SO-DIMMs
  * Uses a more repair-friendly design
  * Being the latest generation, cheaper models hadn't yet hit the market
  * According to [a review](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MEHBvHuBTSM&t=746s), the soldered RAM of the Gen 4 might actually improve battery life

## Installation

Installation is pretty straightforward.

### Set the console font

I haven't set this before but it seems handy since the default font is very small on modern displays.

```
setfont sun12x22
```

Make this persistent:
```
$ cat /etc/vconsole.conf 
FONT=sun12x22
```

### Partition layout

I delete the Windows partition and set the Swap partition the same size as the RAM to enable [Hibernation](#hibernate).

```
Device            Start        End   Sectors   Size Type
/dev/nvme0n1p1     2048    2099199   2097152     1G EFI System
/dev/nvme0n1p2  2099200   71305215  69206016    33G Linux swap
/dev/nvme0n1p3 71305216 1000214527 928909312 442.9G Linux root (x86-64)
```

### Boot loader

Previously I've only ever used Grub so I went with rEFInd which is more graphical and modern.

```
pacman -S refind
```

Install
```
refind-install
```

This doesn't give you a working configuration so you need to modify the config file with the correct boot parameters.
```
$ cat /boot/refind_linux.conf 
"Boot with standard options"  "rw root=/dev/nvme0n1p3 resume=/dev/nvme0n1p2"
"Boot to single-user mode"    "rw root=/dev/nvme0n1p3 single"
"Boot with minimal options"   "ro root=/dev/nvme0n1p3"
```

## Post-Installation

### Network

```
pacman -S networkmanager
```

Enable
```
systemctl enable NetworkManager.service
```

Configure
```
nmtui
```

### Desktop environment

```
pacman -S gnome
```

### Firmware updates

```
pacman -S gnome-firmware
```

## Post Post-installation

Stuff I usually do.

### Avahi

Install
```
sudo pacman -S avahi nss-mdns
```

Enable and start
```
sudo systemctl enable avahi-daemon.service
sudo systemctl start avahi-daemon.service
```

Enable hostname resolution. Modify line in /etc/nsswitch.conf
```
hosts: mymachines mdns4_minimal [NOTFOUND=return] resolve [!UNAVAIL=return] files myhostname dns
```

### Brother HL-3170CDW printer

Install CUPS
```
sudo pacman -S cups
systemctl enable cups.service
systemctl restart cups.service
systemctl status cups.service
```

Install driver
```
yay -S brother-hl3170cdw
```

Add printer via CUPS Administration http://localhost:631/admin

### Hibernate

The other steps are to configure the initramfs:
 - Add 'resume'
 - Regenerate initramfs

Specify the kernel parameter `resume=${swap_device}`.

FROM: https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Power_management/Suspend_and_hibernate#Hibernation

### Jetbrains Mono, Apple and Microsoft fonts

```
sudo pacman -S ttf-jetbrains-mono
yay -S apple-fonts ttf-ms-win11-auto
```

Set the default for Visual Studio Code: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/59776906/how-do-i-change-vs-code-settings-to-use-jetbrains-mono-font

### SSH Agent

Add this to `~/.bashrc`

```
# ssh-agent modified from: https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/SSH_keys#ssh-agent
if ! pgrep -u "$USER" ssh-agent > /dev/null; then
    ssh-agent > "$XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/ssh-agent.env"
fi
if [[ ! -f "$SSH_AUTH_SOCK" ]]; then
    source "$XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/ssh-agent.env" >/dev/null
fi
```

Realized that the timeout is set to 1 hour with the "-t 1h" flag. I removed this since it was annoying.

### Yay - AUR helper

```
sudo pacman -S --needed git base-devel
git clone https://aur.archlinux.org/yay.git
cd yay
# Don't build debug package. This might break if the PKGBUILD options change
sed -i 's/options=(!lto)/options=(!lto !debug)/' PKGBUILD
makepkg -si
```

### Other packages

Some other packages I install:
```
sudo pacman -S bash-completion chromium code git go hugo jq rust sudo vim
```

```
yay -S freetube
```

## Laptop specific

### Battery life

This is generally "good". It's not amazing like a MacBook, mostly because it has a much smaller (39300 mWh) battery and is a less optimized Intel processor.

### Sound

Install this package to get the sound and microphone to work.

```
sudo pacman -S sof-firmware
```

FROM: https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Advanced_Linux_Sound_Architecture#ALSA_firmware

### Suspend and Hibernation

This works great out of the box.

The Lenovo ThinkPad T14 Gen 4 (Intel) only supports "modern suspend" and this is the direction modern chips are going (eliminating S3 suspend).

Previously I thought this was an issue since the Surface Book 3 drains battery while on Suspend. This isn't an issue on the ThinkPad and I realize this is because Linux is properly supported.

